---
title: "Building a Static Site in Swift using Ignite and GitHub Pages"
date: 2024-04-03T21:32:03-05:00
draft: false
author: Kyle Haptonstall
---

I recently decided to update my personal home page (a simple one-page HTML site using Jekyll) to try out Ignite, as I’d much prefer to maintain a Swift package over working directly with HTML. 

[Ignite](https://github.com/twostraws/Ignite) is an open-source static site builder for Swift developers, created by [Paul Hudson](https://twitter.com/twostraws).

While working with Ignite is fairly straightforward, and there are plenty of excellent examples provided in the [IgniteSamples](https://github.com/twostraws/IgniteSamples) repo, I ran into a couple speed bumps deploying via [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com).

Below, I’ll walk you through the steps to get your own static site up and running using Ignite and GitHub Pages.

# Prerequisites

This guide expects you to already be familiar with Git, Swift and SPM. Also, you should have followed the steps to setup a personal GitHub Page using [GitHub’s own documentation](https://pages.github.com) and have that repo cloned locally.

In doing so, you should be able to visit `github-username.github.io` and see a basic HTML page (replacing `github-username` with your own).

# Setting up your Ignite home page

The simplest way to get started is to download the [IgniteStarter](https://github.com/twostraws/IgniteStarter) project.

Add the contents of this project to the root directory of your personal GitHub Page repo you cloned locally.

Since this is a Swift Package, open the contents in Xcode and open the `Site.swift` file. Inside, change the value `url` property to match the url of your personal Github Page:

```swift
struct ExampleSite: Site {    
    var url = URL("github-username.github.io")
}
```

Once updated, build and run the IgniteStarter scheme in Xcode. This should generate a new `Build/` folder in your project and at the top level should be an `index.html` file representing your home page.

# Running your website locally

Before deploying to GitHub Pages, verify that you can run your website locally. In your terminal, navigate into the `Build/` directory generated by Ignite and run the following:

```bash
 python3 -m http.server
```

The output of this command should include the port your local web server is running on (e.g. 8000). In your web browser, navigate to `http://localhost:port` and verify you can view your page.

# Deploying to GitHub Pages

By default, GitHub Pages only deploys from either the root of a branch, or from a `docs/` folder. Since our site live in the `Build/` directory, there are a couple steps to take before successfully deploying to GitHub Pages:

1. Remove the `index.html` file from the root of your directory that you created when first setting up your GitHub Page
2. Open your `.gitignore` and remove the `Build` directory
3. In your GitHub Page repo, navigate to Settings → Pages → Build and deployment. Use the Source dropdown to switch from Deploy from a branch to GitHub Actions
4. Back in your terminal, in the root of your project, prepare a new workflow to deploy your page

    ```bash
    mkdir -p .github/workflows && touch .github/workflows/static.yml
    ```

5. Open `static.yml` and paste the following, changing your default branch as necessary
    a. The important piece here is in the Upload artifact step. Instead of defaulting to the root directory, we’re pointing at the Build directory that contains our home page

    ```yaml
    # Simple workflow for deploying static content to GitHub Pages
    name: Deploy static content to Pages

    on:
      # Runs on pushes targeting the default branch
      push:
        branches: ["main"]

      # Allows you to run this workflow manually from the Actions tab
      workflow_dispatch:

    # Sets permissions of the GITHUB_TOKEN to allow deployment to GitHub Pages
    permissions:
      contents: read
      pages: write
      id-token: write

    # Allow only one concurrent deployment, skipping runs queued between the run in-progress and latest queued.
    # However, do NOT cancel in-progress runs as we want to allow these production deployments to complete.
    concurrency:
      group: "pages"
      cancel-in-progress: false

    jobs:
      # Single deploy job since we're just deploying
      deploy:
        environment:
          name: github-pages
          url: ${{ steps.deployment.outputs.page_url }}
        runs-on: ubuntu-latest
        steps:
          - name: Checkout
            uses: actions/checkout@v4
          - name: Setup Pages
            uses: actions/configure-pages@v5
          - name: Upload artifact
            uses: actions/upload-pages-artifact@v3
            with:
              path: './Build'
          - name: Deploy to GitHub Pages
            id: deployment
            uses: actions/deploy-pages@v4
    ```

6. Push your changes up to GitHub and, once the deployment completes, visit your new Ignite-driven home page 🎉